So let's go into a little
bit of graph theory.
Our applications are structured as graphs,
believe it or not.
So, a graph is a mathematical concept
which is made of nodes and edges.
Each node is connected by an edge,
or a node might not be connected,
but in this graph example,
we have four nodes a, b, c, and d.
And a and
b are connected to each other by an edge.
So you could consider
the edge the way that a and
b could move between each other.
And so b and
c are also connected by an edge as well.
B and d, and same with a and d.
Now this is called an undirected
graph because we don't have an arrow.
A could go to b, b could go to a.
But graphs are a really
good visual model for
thinking about how your application
flows should be structured.
Now, directed graphs
are a little bit different.
We also have nodes and edges, or you'll
see in some math textbooks, vertices and
edges, but with a direction on the edge.
So we could have a node a, a node b, and
we could say a could go to b,
but b can't go to a.
And so this is where we get paths.
So for example, if we want a to go to c,
we could see that we could go from a to b,
and then b to c.
But there's another
path we could take too.
We go from a to d, and we could also
go from d to b, and then from b to c.
And so this shows you, hopefully,
how you could structure your
application flows as a directed graph.
For example, your application
might have a login screen.
And then once you've logged in,
you might go to
an error screen if the login is incorrect,
or you might go to the dashboard.
So that could be represented as
a directed graph where login is a node,
error is a node, and dashboard is a node.
And then when you log
out from the dashboard,
you have an arrow going back to login.
There's three types of
nodes in a directed graph.
There's a source node,
where we have no incoming edges.
There's a sink node where
we have no outgoing edges.
So you can see, once we reach this c node,
there's no way that we could exit it.
There's nothing going out from c.
And then all of the other nodes
are called transfer nodes.
And transfer nodes allow
you to go in between nodes.
So they have at least
one incoming edge and
at least one outgoing edge.
So if you've ever seen the finite
state machine diagram,
you might immediately recognize now that
finite state machines are directed graphs.
Finite state machines
are considered a quintuple,
which means they have
five important parts.
But before we get into that,
I just want you to take a look at this and
try to think about how
the state machine works.
This is a state machine
representing a promise,
which as a web developer you
might be dealing with every day.
So our first state is idle, and
we could see that we have an arrow going
from idle to pending on the fetch events.
And then pending to resolve or
pending to reject, or
pending to resolved or
pending to rejected.
And we see that in this particular graph,
we can't go back.
So we can't go from resolved to pending
and we can't go from rejected to pending.
So this is sort of our intuition for
how the graph works.
Let's dissect it and
take a look at each of the parts.
So the first part of a finite state
machine is, of course, the finite states.
Now, the word states has sort of been
using many different ways in programming,
but in this case we're going to consider
states like a mode or a status.
A state is something where you could only
exist in one mode or status at a time.
For example, I could be sleeping or
I could be awake.
I can't be both sleeping and awake.
That's impossible unless you have
some sort of medical condition.
But let's just consider for ease of
thinking that I'm either asleep or awake.
I could transition between
the asleep state and
the awake state, or I could go from
the awake state to the asleep state.
Now, these finite states don't describe
what's called extended states such as
my name, my age, other things
that might be possibly infinite.
Not that I could live for an infinite
number of years, but one could hope.
So there's also transitions.
Transitions are how you go between states.
So for instance, we have idle to pending,
pending to resolved, and
pending to rejected.
Again, this is a directed graph, so
you can't go back from pending to idle.
There's also events, and events are labels
on these edges, these transitions,
which tell you how one state could
go from that state to another state.
For example, in the idle state,
we could only go to the pending
state when a fetch event happens.
And so, this is considered
the transition between those states.
And similarly,
from pending we could go to resolved or
we could go to rejected depending
on which event happens.
So, every single state machine
starts with an initial state, and
there's only ever one initial state.
So when you walk up to an ATM or
when you turn on your TV,
that state is the initial state.
And it's basically how it starts
to work and accept events.
So this is why we have what's called
a pseudo transition over here,
which is a dot with a very small arrow.
And that indicates that this is the first
or initial state of your state machine.
We also have final states, which we're not
gonna cover too much in this workshop.
And final states represents the fact
that once you reach these states,
your state machine is considered done.
It can no longer accept any events and
it can no longer transition to any states.
In classic finite state machines,
these are also known as accepting states.
So fun fact, regex or regular expressions
are a form of a finite state machine.
And when you reach the end
of a regular expression,
that can be considered its final state.
And so once you reach the final state,
that means that the string which is parsed
by the regular expression is accepted,
or it's rejected if it doesn't
reach one of those final states, but
the goal is to reach a final state.
Now because we're working with web
applications, which might have many states
and might have continuous user behavior
where we don't really have a defined end,
we're not gonna be covering
final states too much.